“It’s not potatoes. It isn’t heavy enough for that.” Then she struck
an attitude with clasped hands. “I never saw one before--never! But my
prophetic soul tells me this is a missionary barrel. And just two days
before Christmas! Well, in the language of my first-born, ‘Hooray!’”

When the minister came in there was a comfortable old coat warmed and
waiting for him, and a smoking supper set out on a little table drawn
up before the stove.

“Sit down, John. I am going to let you eat here in peace away from the
children.” He glanced up questioningly as a roar came from the kitchen,
with snarls and growls in various keys. “It’s all right. They are wild
animals in a cage and I am the keeper. They are having no end of fun.
You had a cold drive.”

“Bitter.”

“You need an ulster with a storm collar.” She glanced involuntarily
at the barrel. “Aren’t these potatoes good, John? So mealy one hardly
needs butter. Lucky thing, too! You didn’t know I skimped the family
out of a pound of butter, did you? Yes, sir, it went into the candy
money.” She meant it as a pleasantry, but somehow it failed, and she
hurried on. “I wish there were more of the potatoes. Those boys do eat
so! But never mind! After Christmas the hens will begin. Funny how
hens can tell the time of the year, isn’t it?” She chattered on about
anything and everything except the draft.

“This certainly is comfort,” he said at last, relaxing under the genial
influence of food and warmth and companionship. “That’s a cold stretch
coming out from town.”

“Didn’t you stop anywhere?”

“Yes. At Joe Henderson’s. Mary--his wife died!”

“John!”

“Yes. Died last night. I never felt so sorry for anybody in my life.
They think the baby will live; and the poor fellow doesn’t know what to
do with it nor where to turn.”

“Oh, John! If only our cow weren’t going dry I would----”

“You shouldn’t do it, anyway,” he said savagely. “You have enough care
now for three women!--Mary, the draft didn’t come.”

“I know,” she said quietly. “But, John, we’ll get along some way. It
can’t last forever. The draft may come next week. And I was joking
about the potatoes. We’ve a lot left.”

“It isn’t just the money,” he said, shaking his head despondently;
“it’s the feeling of aloneness in the work. If I felt that the church
back of us was doing all it could, it would not be so hard--this ‘hope
deferred that maketh the heart sick.’ But sometimes I think--they don’t
care.”

“They do, John--they do! Don’t allow yourself to think that. Why,
look at this barrel! I know this is from some missionary society, and
would any church send us this unless they knew about our work and were
thinking of us? Why, of course not! Tell me about the barrel.”

“Well, I went to the post-office the first thing to get the draft. I
found instead a letter from this First Church, saying they had sent us
a barrel. I went over to the freight office and there it was. I didn’t
have enough--”

“How providential that it came before Christmas!” she interrupted. “I’m
crazy to see what’s in it! Aren’t you?”

He did not answer the question directly, being far from feeling her
jubilance about it. “We’ll open it after a while,” he said evasively.
In his heart he was protesting, “No! I don’t want their barrel! I want
my money!”

“But not until the children are off. There will be Christmas things in
it that they mustn’t see.... You got the candy, John? But of course you
did.”

Her question was unanswered, but she did not notice it.

“Now I really think the animals will have to come in,” she said gayly.
“You can be trainer for an hour while this keeper clears up the dishes.”

And with a whoop they were upon him--lion, tiger, kangaroo, and baby
bear.

When the children were asleep they brought out the barrel--“our charity
box,” the minister called it, half bitterly.

“I can’t help it, John. It may show an impoverished state of the
blood--or of the spirit, I don’t know which--but when I think of all
the things these children need I am glad of this box. I _am_--‘charity’
though you call it! I am almost sorry you spent the money for candy,
for of course there will be a lot of it in here. Well, they will have
enough for once in their lives! And they are so starved for candy.”

Again he started to speak, but she swept on in full tide of happy talk:

“Before we open it I want to show you the things I already have for
them. Of course they will be poor by comparison, so I’ll exhibit them
first. This overcoat is Paul’s, made out of that old, old one of yours
with the plaid flannel lining. I turned the fuzzy side out. He thinks
it’s fine. And with a new one for Paul every overcoat in the line drops
a peg and lands on the next younger--so everybody has a change! Then,
from the pieces of plaid flannel left I made three good mufflers to
tie over their little headies when they scud across the prairies to
school.... And here are three pairs of mittens cut from the scraps of
the coat. I am so proud of myself over those mittens! I had enough yarn
to knit Davie’s, but----”

“There isn’t one woman in a hundred that could have managed so well.”

She snuggled up to him. “That pays me--if I needed pay, which I don’t.
It was a work of love and--well, maybe a little necessity. You told me
once that I had a genius for poverty.”

“And God knows it has had no chance to lie dormant,” he said bitterly.

“I don’t want it to lie dormant. I want every power I possess brought
out to the utmost. I truly have enjoyed concocting these things out of
nothing. There’s nothing that makes a woman feel so virtuous, unless it
is getting off a lot of neglected letters.... Oh, yes, here are their
handkerchiefs--lovely ones made from an old petticoat! But it will make
one thing more for the stockings. Isn’t it glorious that no matter how
much or how little children have at Christmas, they enjoy it just the
same? That is, if they have candy. That is the one indispensable....
And here are the scrapbooks. I’ve been saving pictures all year; the
blank pages are for ‘our special artist’--that’s you. I wish I had
some colored crayons. Oh, they would love colored crayons! And just
think!--only ten cents!”

She was sorry the moment she said it, for a shadow fell upon his face.

“But never mind, John,” she said quickly. “Life isn’t made up of pinks
and greens, and neither is happiness. You can have a whole lot of
happiness in this world in gray--if you only know how; and I’m going to
teach these children the secret. Now look at my eatables. It is great
fun to make a cookie menagerie with one cutter, and that a rabbit.
You see, I stick on a trunk, pull down his ears, round him up a bit,
and behold an elephant! Then when I want a camel I give Br’er Rabbit
two humps, stretch out his jaws, give him a jab almost anywhere--and
there’s your camel! And look at my dachshund. I laughed till I cried
over that. Poor Davie was _so_ distressed when I stretched him out.

“And here’s a nice red apple for each one. Poor Mary Henderson gave
them to me the last time I was over there and I’ve been saving them
ever since. They are a little specked, but I think they will hold out.
I did want the oranges, but ... no, of course you couldn’t when the
draft didn’t come. Anyway, with the candy they won’t miss other things.
I have the bags all ready--red tarlatan from a peach basket--see?

“There’s just one thing I can’t get around. I do want something to
give the house a Christmas look. I miss that. And there’s not a thing
here but sagebrush. At home, in Maryland, we had such quantities of
holly; and we always made wreaths for the windows and had mistletoe for
the chandeliers, and a roaring fire in the open fireplace, and--I can
see those parlors now. Those are the memories that cling to us always,
I think. I am so sorry that our children can never have them. I hate to
think of their lives being utterly devoid of beauty. The East has more
than its share.”

She was talking more to herself than to him, being momentarily carried
off her feet, so to speak, by the flood of recollection sweeping over
her of the old home with its mighty oaks, its giant elms, and the
hills beyond where Christmas trees could be had for the cutting. The
sight of his face brought her back to the present.

“But fortunately Christmas is not dependent upon holly and mistletoe,”
she said brightly. “They are only the ‘outward, visible sign.’ We will
garnish our home with love and good cheer and contentment. After all,
they are the ‘inward, spiritual grace.’”

She threw up her head with a gesture habitual to her as if defying
fate and its limitations, and his eyes followed her as she moved
about the room putting things to rights. What a glorious creature she
was!--accepting poverty and bareness as her portion and yet rising
above them regally; throwing herself into his work, her own round of
toil, her children’s pleasures, the neighborhood sorrows--all with the
same exuberance of interest and prodigality of self! What would he have
been in his work without her, his “missionary coadjutor,” as he called
her? She was so overflowing with vitality, so undaunted, so alive! A
thrill passed through him at the word _alive_.... Poor Joe Henderson!
Suppose--He covered his eyes and his lips moved.

She was on her knees beside him in an instant.

“John, what is it? What are you saying?”

He took her face between his hands and looked into her eyes. “I was
saying: ‘Bless the Lord, O my soul; and forget not all His benefits.’”

“I knew you would come to it, John. Now let’s open the barrel.”